Add Trino 479 release notes (#27153)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-479.md

# Release 479 (TBD 2025)

## General

* Support automatic TLS certificate generation in the `ANNOUNCE` node discovery mode. ({issue}`27030`)
* Add support for specifying the location of the Exchange Manager configuration file. ({issue}`26611`)

> * Publish query finishing time event listener. ({issue}`27202`)

Author: how about "Add support for finishing time in event listener" @raunaqmorarka

# Release 479 (TBD 2025)

## General

* Support automatic TLS certificate generation in the `ANNOUNCE` node discovery mode. ({issue}`27030`)
* Add support for specifying the location of the Exchange Manager configuration file. ({issue}`26611`)
* Publish query finishing time in event listener. ({issue}`27202`)

> * Add lineage support for output columns in all SELECT queries({issue}`26241`)

Author: Original release note in pr was: "Compute lineage for output columns in all SELECT queries." 
@kasiafi @Praveen2112 @behrooz-stripe  FYI

# Release 479 (TBD 2025)

## General

> * Support automatic TLS certificate generation in the `ANNOUNCE` node discovery mode. ({issue}`27030`)

Reviewer: Yes, this is internal communication

* Add support for specifying the location of the Exchange Manager configuration file. ({issue}`26611`)
* Publish query finishing time in event listener. ({issue}`27202`)
* Add lineage support for output columns in all SELECT queries ({issue}`26241`)
* Require JDK 25 to build and run Trino ({issue}`27153`)
* Require the JDK Vector API to be enabled at runtime ({issue}`27340`)

> * Add support for `SET DEFAULT` and `DROP DEFAULT` statements. ({issue}`26162`)

Reviewer 2: It's not updated yet.

* Add `array_first` and `array_last` functions. ({issue}`27295`)

> * Enhance after `RemoveTrivialFilters` call `RemoveEmptyUnionBranches` to prune empty union branches. ({issue}`21506`)

Reviewer 3: This does not convey what's the end user visible change. 
Also link might is wrong. Is this #26349? There is another bullet below also linking to #21506, related to #27191 PR.

Author: It's linking to `21506` because it fixes it. should we put also pr number here as well?

the release notes should be: Fix query failure when `UNION` involve empty values branch ? @kasiafi @Max-Cheng

Reviewer 4: ```
* Fix query failure when one of the branches of a `UNION` is known to produce zero rows during query planning.
```

* Improve performance of {func}`array_sort` function. ({issue}`27272`)
* Improve performance of `repeat` function. ({issue}`27369`)

> * Improve performance of data exchanges by using SIMD instructions on x86 CPUs that support the required extensions. This can be disabled by setting `experimental.blockserde-vectorized-null-suppression-strategy=NONE`({issue}`26919`)

Reviewer 3: > by sing SIMD instructions on x86 CPUs that support the required extensions.

What happens when required extensions are not present on an x86 CPU?
is it a failure?

Author: cc @pettyjamesm

* Fix planning failure of certain queries where part of the plan is optimized to empty values. ({issue}`21506`)

> * Fix configuring partitioned layout for spooling protocol ({issue}`27247`)

Reviewer 3: Fix server startup failure when partitioned spooling is configured.
This is spooling-filesystem plugin change. Still in General section?

## Security

## Web UI

> * Fix preview UI to render single line sqls. ({issue}`27328`)

Reviewer 3: sqls -> queries ?

* Add support for specifying the location of the Exchange Manager configuration file. ({issue}`26611`)
* Publish query finishing time in event listener. ({issue}`27202`)
* Add lineage support for output columns in all SELECT queries. ({issue}`26241`)
* Require JDK 25 to build and run Trino. ({issue}`27153`)
* Require the JDK Vector API to be enabled at runtime. ({issue}`27340`)
* Add support for `SET DEFAULT` and `DROP DEFAULT` statements. ({issue}`26162`)
* Add `array_first` and `array_last` functions. ({issue}`27295`)
* Deprecate `EXPLAIN (TYPE LOGICAL)`. `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` should be used instead. ({issue}`27434`)
* Improve performance of data exchanges by using SIMD instructions on ARM CPUs that support SVE, such as graviton 3 and 4. This can be disabled by setting `experimental.blockserde-vectorized-null-suppression-strategy=NONE`. ({issue}`27426`)
* Enhance after `RemoveTrivialFilters` call `RemoveEmptyUnionBranches` to prune empty union branches. ({issue}`21506`)
* Improve performance of {func}`array_sort` function. ({issue}`27272`)
* Improve performance of `repeat` function. ({issue}`27369`)

> * Improve performance of data exchanges by using SIMD instructions on x86 CPUs that support the required extensions. This can be disabled by setting `experimental.blockserde-vectorized-null-suppression-strategy=NONE`. ({issue}`26919`)

Author: "Skip", should I remove this note entry, just keep above one?

* Add `retain_last` and `clean_expired_metadata` options to `expire_snapshots` command. ({issue}`27357`)
* Add `APPLICATION_DEFAULT` authentication type for GCS. ({issue}`26984`)
* Remove `s3.exclusive-create` config. ({issue}`27372`)
* {{breaking}} Remove support for unauthenticated access when GCS authentication type is set to `SERVICE_ACCOUNT`. ({issue}`26984`)
* * Reduce memory pressure when the table contains highly nested fields. ({issue}`25077`)
* Fix failures when querying `$files` table after changes to table partitioning. ({issue}`26746`)
* Fix incorrect results for queries involving `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM`. ({issue}`27213`)
* Fix failure when checking Azure hierarchical namespaces. ({issue}`27278`)
* Avoid worker crashes by failing queries attempting to read columns with huge values in parquet files. ({issue}`27148`)
* Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures occur during writes to S3. ({issue}`27330`)
* Fix potential failure when dropping a schema with `CASCADE` option. ({issue}`27361`)

> * Fix failure when handling of dropped base tables for materialized views. ({issue}`27606`)

Author: Applied @piotrrzysko 's

# Release 479 (TBD 2025)

## General

* Support automatic TLS certificate generation in the `ANNOUNCE` node discovery mode. ({issue}`27030`)
* Add support for specifying the location of the Exchange Manager configuration file. ({issue}`26611`)
* Publish query finishing time in event listener. ({issue}`27202`)
* Add lineage support for output columns in `SELECT` queries. ({issue}`26241`)
* Require JDK 25 to build and run Trino. ({issue}`27153`)
* Require the JDK Vector API to be enabled at runtime. ({issue}`27340`)
* Add support for `SET DEFAULT` and `DROP DEFAULT` statements. ({issue}`26162`)

> * Add {func}`array_first` and {func}`array_last` functions. ({issue}`27295`)

Author: done

* Improve performance of remote data exchanges on CPUs supporting the required SIMD extensions. This can be disabled by setting `exchange.experimental.vectorized-serde.enabled=false`. ({issue}`27426`, {issue}`26919`)
* Enhance after `RemoveTrivialFilters` call `RemoveEmptyUnionBranches` to prune empty union branches. ({issue}`21506`)
* Improve performance of {func}`array_sort` function. ({issue}`27272`)
* Improve performance of {func}`repeat` function. ({issue}`27369`)
* Improve performance of data exchanges involving variable width data. ({issue}`27377`)
* Fix planning failure of certain queries where part of the plan is optimized to empty values. ({issue}`21506`)
* Fix configuring partitioned layout for spooling protocol. ({issue}`27247`)
* Fix `EXPLAIN (TYPE IO)` failure when query constraint contains type which cannot be cast to `varchar`. ({issue}`27433`)

## Security

## Web UI

* Fix preview UI to render single line queries. ({issue}`27328`)
* Fix preview UI to render catalog properties correctly. ({issue}`27327`)

## JDBC driver

## Docker image

* Update JDK to 25.0.1. ({issue}`27117`)

## CLI

> * Add a `--extra-header` argument to the trino-cli to support sending arbitrary HTTP headers to Trino. ({issue}`15826`)

Reviewer 2: The "trino-cli" is a module name - we shouldn't mention. 

```suggestion
* Add a `--extra-header` option to support sending arbitrary HTTP headers. ({issue}`15826`)
```

* Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures during s3 write. ({issue}`27330`)
* Prevent log writer from failing with FileAlreadyExistsException when there are network failures during write. 
  writing to s3 now requires permissions for PutObjectTagging and GetObjectTagging operations (breaking change). ({issue}`27388`)
* Fix potential failure when reading [cloned tables](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/delta/clone). ({issue}`27098`)

## Druid connector

* Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

## DuckDB connector

* Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

## Elasticsearch connector

## Exasol connector

* Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

## Faker connector

## Google Sheets connector

## Hive connector

> 

Reviewer 2: No need to mention 26984 in Hive connector?

* Remove `s3.exclusive-create` config. ({issue}`27372`)
* Fix updating table statistics when running INSERT queries with OVERWRITE behaviour. ({issue}`26517`)

> * Harden hierarchical namespace check in Azure with root blob fallback check. ({issue}`27278`)

Reviewer 2: This entry should start with "Fix failure when ...". Same for other connectors.

# Release 479 (TBD 2025)

## General

> * Support automatic TLS certificate generation in the `ANNOUNCE` node discovery mode. ({issue}`27030`)

Author: done

* Add support for specifying the location of the Exchange Manager configuration file. ({issue}`26611`)

> * Publish query finishing time in event listener. ({issue}`27202`)

Reviewer 4: Query "finishing time" is an internal concept that has never been exposed to users. It needs to be described in terms of what the user sees.

Reviewer 5: This is a field in the event listener, there are many fields exposed there which have never been explained to end users. FINISHING query state is already visible in the web UI when a query reaches that state, so it's not a complete unknown.
We could say `Publish time taken by query in FINISHING state in event listener`, not sure if that's any better.

Author: updated

> * Add lineage support for output columns in `SELECT` queries. ({issue}`26241`)

Reviewer 4: This is unclear. What's the user-visible impact of this? What does it mean to have lineage for output columns?

Author: so, it is more likely :  "Add lineage support for output columns of `SELECT` queries"

* Require JDK 25 to build and run Trino. ({issue}`27153`)
* Require the JDK Vector API to be enabled at runtime. ({issue}`27340`)
* Add support for setting and dropping column defaults via ALTER TABLE ... ALTER COLUMN" at current. ({issue}`26162`)
* Add {func}`array_first` and {func}`array_last` functions. ({issue}`27295`)
* {{breaking}} The configuration property `task.statistics-cpu-timer-enabled` is now defunct and must be removed. ({issue}`27504`)

> * Allow field name declaration in ROW literal.  For example, `row(1 as a, 2 as b)` is now legal. ({issue}`25261`)

Author: done

> * Deprecate `EXPLAIN (TYPE LOGICAL)`. `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` should be used instead. ({issue}`27434`)

Author: @martint could you help to confirm this?

> * Deprecate `EXPLAIN (TYPE LOGICAL)`. `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` should be used instead. ({issue}`27434`)

Reviewer 4: Yes, both should be deprecated, since there's no longer a distinction between them. Really, we should consolidate both under a new type (say, `PLAN`) that's the default selection if no type is specified. 

We don't need to do anything from an implementation perspective at this point though. We can just say that TYPE = DISTRIBUTED or LOCAL are deprecated and that EXPLAIN <query> should be used to get the query plan.

> * Deprecate `EXPLAIN (TYPE LOGICAL)`. `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` should be used instead. ({issue}`27434`)

Author: for the release note we can't say we deprecated both since the later one isn't changed in code.
Does the "Deprecate `EXPLAIN (TYPE LOGICAL)`. `EXPLAIN <query>` should be used instead" make sense?

> * Deprecate `EXPLAIN (TYPE LOGICAL)`. `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` should be used instead. ({issue}`27434`)

Reviewer 4: Deprecation of functionality doesn’t necessarily need any code changes. Code changes can help, but at the end of the day, it’s just a policy decision.

> * Deprecate `EXPLAIN (TYPE LOGICAL)`. `EXPLAIN (TYPE DISTRIBUTED)` should be used instead. ({issue}`27434`)

Reviewer 4: We can rephrase as:

> Deprecate `EXPLAIN` type `LOGICAL` and `DISTRIBUTED`. Use `EXPLAIN` without a type clause, instead. ({issue}`27434`)

* Remove `prefer_streaming_operators` session property. `SET SESSION task_concurrency=1` can be used to achieve the same behaviour as `prefer_streaming_operators`. ({issue}`27506`)

> * Improve performance of remote data exchanges on CPUs supporting the required SIMD extensions. This can be disabled by setting `exchange.experimental.vectorized-serde.enabled=false`. ({issue}`27426`, {issue}`26919`)

Reviewer 6: I think the PR linked is about as good as any, but I’ll defer to @martint about how much context it makes sense to include for release notes here.

> * Improve performance of remote data exchanges on CPUs supporting the required SIMD extensions. This can be disabled by setting `exchange.experimental.vectorized-serde.enabled=false`. ({issue}`27426`, {issue}`26919`)

Author: updated

* Enhance after `RemoveTrivialFilters` call `RemoveEmptyUnionBranches` to prune empty union branches. ({issue}`21506`)
* Improve performance of {func}`array_sort` function. ({issue}`27272`)
* Improve performance of {func}`repeat` function. ({issue}`27369`)
* Improve performance of data exchanges involving variable width data. ({issue}`27377`)
* Fix planning failure of certain queries where part of the plan is optimized to empty values. ({issue}`21506`)
* Fix configuring partitioned layout for spooling protocol. ({issue}`27247`)
* Fix `EXPLAIN (TYPE IO)` failure when query constraint contains type which cannot be cast to `varchar`. ({issue}`27433`)

## Security

## Web UI

> * Fix preview UI to render single line queries. ({issue}`27328`)

Author: @wendigo @koszti

> * Fix preview UI to render single line queries. ({issue}`27328`)

Author: updated to above

* Fix preview UI to render catalog properties correctly. ({issue}`27327`)

## JDBC driver

> * Add a `--extra-header` option to support sending arbitrary HTTP headers. ({issue}`15826`)

Reviewer 2: The right property name for JDBC driver is `extraHeaders`: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/15826/files#diff-8a35d1b445b96b84830e90747fddf17d1c312ab99dde1084b997a0aaa46996e2R238

## Docker image

* Update JDK to 25.0.1. ({issue}`27117`)

## CLI

* Add a `--extra-header` option to support sending arbitrary HTTP headers. ({issue}`15826`)
* Fix TLS connection failures when using unqualified (single-label, without ".") hostnames. Default Java TLS does not send Server Name Indication (SNI) for such hostnames, which could cause certificate mismatches during TLS termination. ({issue} `27478`)

## BigQuery connector

## Blackhole connector

## Cassandra connector

## ClickHouse connector

> * Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

Reviewer 3: @martint  The functionality (ability to push Join down into JDBC connectors when join has not only equi-clauses) is not being deprecated. it remains enabled by default and the toggle controlling it gets removed. 

@chenjian2664 to me, "deprecate x" means "x is still available but you should stop using it; you may get a warning". I would write this if we added `@Deprecated` annotation to the config, which indeed triggers a startup warning when the config is used. However, @kokosing wanted the toggle to be also renamed, because people don't read RNs carefully, which is why just saying "deprecate" isn't giving a justice.

BTW i think we should have a more structured process for removing config variables. Perhaps something like https://github.com/airlift/airlift/pull/756 could help.

> * Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

Author: @findepi Thanks for the explanation. I see,  it is essentially a rename, and it also feels like a deprecation.
I am not sure whether it qualifies as a breaking change. "Configuration changes" generally require extra attention because they tend to affect users, although I am not certain how this one would.
For now, I intend to keep the original phrasing.

> * Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

Reviewer 4: I think we need to fix the code here. We should mark the property with LegacyConfig as I mentioned above so that users get a warning at startup time that the property is deprecated and not mention anything in the release notes.

## Delta Lake connector

* Add `APPLICATION_DEFAULT` authentication type for GCS. ({issue}`26984`)

> * Remove unauthentication access support in `SERVICE_ACCOUNT`. ({issue}`26984`)

Reviewer 4: Did you mean "unauthenticated access"?

Rephrase as:
```
* Remove support for unauthenticated access when GCS authentication type is set to `SERVICE_ACCOUNT`.
```

Also, mark it as `{breaking}`

Author: Yes, meant "unauthenticated access".

updated

* Rename `s3.exclusive-create` config to `delta.s3.transaction-log-conditional-writes.enabled`. ({issue}`27372`)

> * Fix incorrect results due to incorrect pushdown of `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM`. ({issue}`27213`)

Reviewer 4: ```
* Fix incorrect results for queries involving `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM`
```

Author: updated

> * Fix failure when writing to tables written by Databricks 17.3. ({issue}`27100`)

Reviewer 4: Maybe:

```
... when writing to tables created by Databricks 17.3
```

> * Harden hierarchical namespace check in Azure with root blob fallback check. ({issue}`27278`)

Author: @findinpath

> * Avoid reading unusually large pages from parquet files. ({issue}`27148`)

Reviewer 4: What's the user visible impact?

Reviewer 5: It fails queries attempting to read parquet files with massive pages, as doing so risks worker OOMs. This is rare but could happen with columns containing massive strings or binary data.
Maybe reword it to `Avoid worker crashes by failing queries attempting to read columns with huge values in parquet files`

> * Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures during s3 write. ({issue}`27330`)

Author: updated

> * Prevent log writer from failing with FileAlreadyExistsException when there are network failures during write. 

Reviewer 4: Isn't this the same as the one above? Remove it.

Author: @findepi Do you think it is necessary to mention later phrase: "writing to s3 now requires permissions for PutObjectTagging and GetObjectTagging operations (breaking change). ({issue}`27388`)"

Reviewer 3: These are two separate things. Yes, we can collapse them to a single bullet because the end user manifestation was the same. Just have a link to both #27330 and #27388

Author: @findepi "Yes, ..", I understand it as "we could remove the RN", so I have therefore removed the RN entry, link https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/27388 to above as well, FYI

  writing to s3 now requires permissions for PutObjectTagging and GetObjectTagging operations (breaking change). ({issue}`27388`)
* Fix potential failure when reading [cloned tables](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/delta/clone). ({issue}`27098`)

## Druid connector

> * Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

Reviewer 4: Same as earlier.

## DuckDB connector

> * Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

Reviewer 4: Same as earlier.

## Elasticsearch connector

## Exasol connector

* Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

## Faker connector

## Google Sheets connector

## Hive connector

> * Remove `s3.exclusive-create` config. ({issue}`27372`)

Reviewer 4: So it was a no-op for Hive before? In that case, we don't need to mention anything here.

* Fix updating table statistics when running INSERT queries with OVERWRITE behaviour. ({issue}`26517`)
* Harden hierarchical namespace check in Azure with root blob fallback check. ({issue}`27278`)
* Avoid reading unusually large pages from parquet files. ({issue}`27148`)
* Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures during s3 write. ({issue}`27330`)

## Hudi connector

* Add `APPLICATION_DEFAULT` authentication type for GCS. ({issue}`26984`)
* Remove unauthentication access support in `SERVICE_ACCOUNT`. ({issue}`26984`)
* Harden hierarchical namespace check in Azure with root blob fallback check. ({issue}`27278`)
* Avoid reading unusually large pages from parquet files. ({issue}`27148`)
* Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures during s3 write. ({issue}`27330`)

> * Fix failure when listing empty directories on HDFS. ({issue}`26897`)

Reviewer 4: Users don't know when that listing happens. Describe it in terms of concepts users can relate to.

Author: How about "Fix failure when querying HDFS that includes empty directories."

Author: applied above, FYI

## Iceberg connector

> * Add support for disabling token exchange via the `iceberg.rest-catalog.oauth2.token-exchange-enabled` config property. ({issue}`27174`)

Author: It is the "token-exchange-enabled" in https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/nightly/configuration/#oauth2-auth-properties

How about :"Add support for updating [token-exchange-enabled](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/nightly/configuration/#oauth2-auth-properties) via the `iceberg.rest-catalog.oauth2.token-exchange-enabled` config property. ({issue}`27174`)"

* Add `retain_last` and `clean_expired_metadata` options to `expire_snapshots` command. ({issue}`27357`)
* Remove `s3.exclusive-create` config. ({issue}`27372`)
* Add `APPLICATION_DEFAULT` authentication type for GCS. ({issue}`26984`)
* Remove unauthentication access support in `SERVICE_ACCOUNT`. ({issue}`26984`)
* Fix failures when querying `$files` table after changes to table partitioning. ({issue}`26746`)
* Fix incorrect results due to incorrect pushdown of `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM`. ({issue}`27213`)
* Harden hierarchical namespace check in Azure with root blob fallback check. ({issue}`27278`)
* Avoid reading unusually large pages from parquet files. ({issue}`27148`)
* Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures during s3 write. ({issue}`27330`)

> * Fix potential failure when dropping a schema with cascade. ({issue}`27361`)

Reviewer 4: ```
... when dropping a schema with `CASCADE` option.
```

## Ignite connector

> * Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

Reviewer 4: Same as earlier.

## JMX connector

## Kafka connector

## Loki connector

* Fix failure when initializing the connector. ({issue}`27180`)

## MariaDB connector

* Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. The new property will be removed in a future version.

## Memory connector

* Add support for setting and dropping column defaults via `ALTER TABLE ... ALTER COLUMN`. ({issue}`26162`)

> * Fix concurrent modification exception in `RENAME SCHEMA`. ({issue}`27205`)

Reviewer 4: What's "concurrent modification exception"? When does it happen? Describe those conditions, instead.

Author: applied

* Improve performance of {func}`array_sort` function. ({issue}`27272`)
* Improve performance of {func}`repeat` function. ({issue}`27369`)
* Improve performance of data exchanges involving variable width data. ({issue}`27377`)
* Fix query failure when one of the branches of a `UNION` is known to produce zero rows during query planning. ({issue}`21506`)
* Fix configuring partitioned layout for spooling protocol. ({issue}`27247`)
* Fix `EXPLAIN (TYPE IO)` failure when query predicate contains a type which cannot be cast to `varchar`. ({issue}`27433`)

## Security

## Web UI

* Render long single-line query string correctly in preview UI query details page. ({issue}`27328`)
* Render catalog properties correctly in preview UI. ({issue}`27327`)

## JDBC driver

* Add a `extraHeaders` option to support sending arbitrary HTTP headers. ({issue}`15826`)

## Docker image

* Update JDK to 25.0.1. ({issue}`27117`)

## CLI

* Add a `--extra-header` option to support sending arbitrary HTTP headers. ({issue}`15826`)
* Fix TLS connection failures when using unqualified (single-label, without ".") hostnames. ({issue} `27478`)

## BigQuery connector

> * Fix query failure when reusing `query` table function result. ({issue}`27573`)

Reviewer 4: Link to the function docs

## Blackhole connector

## Cassandra connector

## ClickHouse connector

* {{breaking}} Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. 
  The new property will be removed in a future version.

## Delta Lake connector

* Add `APPLICATION_DEFAULT` authentication type for GCS. ({issue}`26984`)
* {{breaking}} Remove support for unauthenticated access when GCS authentication type is set to `SERVICE_ACCOUNT`. ({issue}`26984`)
* Rename `s3.exclusive-create` config to `delta.s3.transaction-log-conditional-writes.enabled`. ({issue}`27372`)
* Fix incorrect results for queries involving `IS NOT DISTINCT FROM`. ({issue}`27213`)
* Fix failure when writing to tables created by Databricks 17.3. ({issue}`27100`)

> * Fix failure when checking Azure hierarchical namespaces to avoid requiring additional storage permissions. ({issue}`27278`)

Reviewer 4: The phrasing sounds weird. It read as if there's a failure that results in requiring additional storage permissions (which makes little sense), and that we're fixing such failure so that the user doesn't have to specify additional storage permissions 🤔. Is the "to" meant to be an "and"?

TL;DR, I have no idea what this is about from reading the item. It's probably simpler to just say "Fix failure when checking Azure hierarchical namespaces".

* Fix failure when listing tables with invalid table metadata in AWS Glue. ({issue}`27525`)

## Hudi connector

* Add `APPLICATION_DEFAULT` authentication type for GCS. ({issue}`26984`)
* {{breaking}} Remove support for unauthenticated access when GCS authentication type is set to `SERVICE_ACCOUNT`. ({issue}`26984`)
* Fix failure when checking Azure hierarchical namespaces to avoid requiring additional storage permissions. ({issue}`27278`)
* Avoid worker crashes by failing queries attempting to read columns with huge values in parquet files. ({issue}`27148`)
* Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures occur during writes to S3. ({issue}`27330`)
* Fix failure when querying HDFS that includes empty directories. ({issue}`26897`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for updating [token-exchange-enabled](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/nightly/configuration/#oauth2-auth-properties) via the `iceberg.rest-catalog.oauth2.token-exchange-enabled` config property. ({issue}`27174`)
* Add `retain_last` and `clean_expired_metadata` options to `expire_snapshots` command. ({issue}`27357`)
* Add `APPLICATION_DEFAULT` authentication type for GCS. ({issue}`26984`)

> * Remove `s3.exclusive-create` config. ({issue}`27372`)

Author: updated

* Fix failure when checking Azure hierarchical namespaces to avoid requiring additional storage permissions. ({issue}`27278`)
* Avoid worker crashes by failing queries attempting to read columns with huge values in parquet files. ({issue}`27148`)
* Fix potential `FileAlreadyExistsException` failure when network failures occur during writes to S3. ({issue}`27330`)
* Fix potential failure when dropping a schema with `CASCADE` option. ({issue}`27361`)

## Ignite connector

* {{breaking}} Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. 
  The new property will be removed in a future version.

## JMX connector

## Kafka connector

## Loki connector

* Fix failure when initializing the connector. ({issue}`27180`)

## MariaDB connector

* {{breaking}} Replace `join-pushdown.with-expressions` configuration property with `deprecated.join-pushdown.with-expressions`. 
  The new property will be removed in a future version.

## Memory connector

* Add support for setting and dropping column defaults via `ALTER TABLE ... ALTER COLUMN`. ({issue}`26162`)

> * Fixed `RENAME SCHEMA` in the memory connector when there is more than one table in the schema. ({issue}`27205`)

Reviewer 4: * "Fix" instead of "fixed"
* What does it fix? A failure? Corruption? Incorrect results?
* No need to mention "memory connector". It's self evident, since it's in the memory connector section

Reviewer: > What does it fix? A failure? Corruption? Incorrect results?

I'd say it's a failure. It just didn't work at all (in the given circumstances).

Reviewer 4: Then update it to “fix failure” or “avoid failure”. Don’t mention “concurrent modification exception” as that’s a pretty low level concept and can be misread as “two renames running at the same time”

# Release 479 (TBD 2025)

## General

* Update JDK to 25.0.1 ({issue}`27117`)
* Support automatic TLS certificate generation in the `ANNOUNCE` node discovery mode. ({issue}`27030`)

> * Fix planning failure of certain queries involving empty VALUES. ({issue}`21506`)

Reviewer 4: From the point of view of the user, VALUES cannot be empty.

Author: @kasiafi PTAL

Reviewer 7: >From the point of view of the user, VALUES cannot be empty.

True. How about "Fix planning failure of certain queries where part of the plan is optimized to empty values."?

Author: applied to "Fix query failure when one of the branches of a `UNION` is known to produce zero rows during query planning" as blow suggested, FYI

# Release 479 (TBD 2025)

## General

* Support automatic TLS certificate generation in the `ANNOUNCE` node discovery mode. ({issue}`27030`)
* Fix planning failure of certain queries involving empty VALUES. ({issue}`21506`)
* Add support for specifying the location of the Exchange Manager configuration file. ({issue}`26611`)

> * Publish query finishing time event listener. ({issue}`27202`)

Reviewer 2: @chenjian2664 Could you sort entires by the following rule? 
* New features: Start with Add or Add support for or similar wording
* Performance improvements: Start with Improve or Improve performance or similar wording
* Bug fixes: Start with Fix or Prevent or similar wording

https://trino.io/development/process#release-note-guidelines
